Malaysia has updated its Covid-19 testing requirements for international and local travellers arriving in the country under three travel schemes.
Those using the Vaccinated Travel Lane (VTL) by air and land, the Langkawi International Travel Bubble (LITB), and the One Stop Centre (OSC) for short-term business visitors will have to undergo additional Covid-19 tests for six days after arriving in Malaysia.
The new requirement will also apply to travellers from Singapore.
Health Minister Khairy Jamaluddin said the requirement, which will take effect from today, aims to strengthen the Ministry of Health’s existing precautionary and control measures to prevent the transmission and spread of the Omicron variant in the country.
Under existing procedures, VTL travellers undergo a professionally-administered Covid-19 detection test on arrival in Malaysia - a reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test for those arriving by air, and the antigen rapid test kit (RTK-Ag) for those arriving by land.
Under the new rules, travellers will have to undergo additional tests after their arrival. These consist of a self-administered RTK-Ag test on the second, fourth and sixth day after their arrival, and a professionally-administered RTK-Ag test on the third and fifth day after arriving.
Mr Khairy said those travellers must also ensure that they are fully vaccinated and must undergo RT-PCR tests 48 hours prior to their travel dates, shortened from the earlier requirement set at 72 hours before departure, reported national news agency Bernama.
Additionally, those using the LITB must undergo an RT-PCR test at least 48 hours before leaving Langkawi island.
Mr Khairy said all test results must be reported through Malaysia’s Covid-19 tracing app MySejahtera.
Ms Melissa Lee, 36, who works in the banking industry in Singapore, said she is planning to travel to Kuala Lumpur via the Air VTL on Dec 15, to visit her parents and spend time with friends after being away from Malaysia for two years.
Ms Lee, a Singapore permanent resident who has worked in the country for about a decade, said the new daily testing rules will be an added inconvenience and increase her travel costs, but will not deter her from making the trip home.
"I'm just glad that the Singapore and Malaysia authorities are still pressing ahead with the VTL instead of pausing it, and I feel the new testing measures are a good precaution, because even as I return home and roam freely, I'll be able to have peace of mind that I'm Covid-free," she said.
"Even with the added costs, travelling home will be worth it because it's my first time flying home in two years."
Ms Hee Xin Wei, 24, who works in a healthcare software company in Singapore, said that although the added daily tests increase the long list of travel requirements, it will not deter her from travel as long as the VTL remains open.
She is hoping to return home for two weeks during Chinese New Year next year, having not been home to Penang since Chinese New Year in 2020.
"After waiting for so long to return, I'm happy to abide by any measures as long as they help to ensure the VTL can proceed," she said.
"I see it as the authorities trying to be safe, and as long as the VTL is not cancelled, I am happy with how things are."
Ms Hee added that the daily antigen rapid tests do not feel like much of an added inconvenience compared with the other paperwork, planning and pre-departure tests that she has to go through before travelling home.
Meanwhile, Mr Khairy said travellers from five countries with reported cases of Omicron in the community, namely Britain, the United States, Australia, France and Norway, will be required to get tested with an RT-PCR swab test 48 hours before departing for Malaysia.
He added that these travellers will also be required to use a digital tracking device on them at all times during their mandatory quarantine period.
Mr Khairy said travellers - including Malaysian citizens and long-term visit pass holders - arriving from the eight countries under the temporary travel ban must also use a digital tracking device at the designated isolation centres during their 14-day mandatory quarantine period.
The eight countries on temporary travel restrictions are South Africa, Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mozambique, Namibia, Zimbabwe and Malawi.
Mr Khairy added that the preventive measures will be reviewed from time to time.
As of Tuesday, 43 countries have reported Omicron-related cases.
The Omicron variant was detected last Thursday in Ipoh, in a 19-year-old South African private university student who had arrived from South Africa via Singapore on Nov 19.
Malaysia's efforts to transition to an endemic phase will be put on pause as the government looks to find out more about the new COVID-19 Omicron variant. 
Senior Defence Minister Hishammuddin Hussein on Tuesday (Nov 30) said the government was aware that the variant has not only spread in South Africa, but also to several other countries including Italy, Australia, United Kingdom, and Hong Kong.
Malaysia's government had previously set seven criteria that needed to be achieved before the health ministry could declare the country as entering the endemic phase of living with the COVID-19 virus.
The criteria included the number of beds being utilised in hospitals, intensive care units and COVID-19 low-risk quarantine and treatment centres; testing capacity at laboratories and the rate of positive cases.
Hishammuddin said the health ministry was also seeking more information on the incubation period, symptoms and infectiousness of the Omicron variant, and would make an announcement on the matter soon.
In the meantime, the government would impose stricter border controls on countries where the new variant was prevalent, he said. 
Commenting on South African President Cyril Ramaphosa's call for the lifting of travel restrictions on the country, Hishammuddin said the decision was based on security risks and advice from the health ministry. 
“What the MOH (Ministry of Health) has decided is not too different from what has been done by other countries out there, I believe the African countries understand that it (travel restriction) is not related to diplomacy or geopolitics, but about health.
"We do not want to jeopardise what we have been doing for one and a half years with irresponsible actions," he said.
Ramaphosa on Monday urged countries around the world to immediately lift the travel ban to the country, which he described as being "unjustified and unfair". 
Also addressing the risk of reopening the Malaysia-Singapore border via the vaccinated travel lane (VTL) following the spread of the new variant, Hishammuddin said it was being monitored.
“The Quartet meeting took note of the discussions between the two Prime Ministers (Malaysia and Singapore) on the potential of having more destinations (with the VTL implemented), such as Singapore to Penang, Langkawi, Kuching and Kota Kinabalu.
"I have asked all parties to continue to think and discuss, but we will not make a decision until we know the real effects and impact of this new variant," he said.
The Health Ministry has announced that all incoming travellers via the Vaccinated Travel Lane (VTL) and those travelling to Langkawi under its travel bubble must undergo Covid-19 tests every day after arrival.
Health Minister Khairy Jamaluddin (pic) this was one of the preemptive measures taken in light of the new highly infectious Omicron variant.
"Travellers from the United Kingdom, United States, Australia, France & Norway on home quarantine will need to wear a digital tracking device (throughout the entire home quarantine period)," he added in a tweet on Tuesday (Dec 7).
This follows after the Covid-19 variant Omicron was detected in Malaysia.
On Friday (Dec 3), Khairy had said that travellers from high-risk countries listed by the government under home monitoring will be subjected to enhanced surveillance.
He had said this is to ensure that the compliance to the home quarantine is complete.
The Omicron variant was detected on Thursday (Dec 2) involving a 19-year-old South African private university student in Ipoh who arrived from South Africa through Singapore on Nov 19.
Malaysia has detected its first case of the Omicron coronavirus variant but its health minister said the Vaccinated Travel Lane (VTL) scheme between the country and Singapore will continue.
The variant was identified in a 19-year-old woman who had arrived from South Africa via Singapore on Nov 19, Health Minister Khairy Jamaluddin said in a briefing on Friday (Dec 3).
She is a student at a private university in Ipoh, Perak, and has completed her Covid-19 vaccination, he said.
The student was quarantined for 10 days before being released on Nov 29.
Authorities had re-tested earlier positive samples after the World Health Organisation (WHO) announced Omicron as a variant of concern on Nov 24, Mr Khairy said.
Five other people who shared a vehicle with the woman prior to her quarantine all tested negative.
"It’s important to note that this case came in to Malaysia on Nov 19 before South Africa reported the first case to the World Health Organisation," he said.
"After we found out about Omicron we went back to do genomic tests on all positive cases from the Kuala Lumpur International Airport between Nov 11 and 28. That’s how we detected the case."
Authorities, however, have asked the student along with eight close contacts to undergo further testing after her earlier test samples were confirmed to be the new variant, Mr Khairy added.
An increasing number of countries are reporting cases of the Omicron variant, which the WHO has said carries a very high risk of causing surges of infection.
Neighbouring Singapore confirmed two imported cases on Thursday.
In response to media queries, Singapore’s Ministry of Health saidon Friday that the traveller had arrived in Changi Airport from Johannesburg via Singapore Airlines Flight SQ479 on Nov 19. She remained in the transit holding area until she left for Malaysia on the same day.
The ministry added that 15 passengers on board her flight had been identified as her close contacts, but none entered Singapore with contact tracing underway.
This week, Malaysia temporarily banned the entry of travellers from eight southern African countries that have reported the presence of the variant or are considered high-risk.
Malaysia and Singapore on Monday opened land and air vaccinated travel lanes, and plan to further reopen their borders as daily infections decline.
Malaysia will maintain its travel lane with Singapore for now, Mr Khairy said.
"I've spoken to my Singapore counterpart this morning... and we reaffimed that the VTL will continue. We will continue to update each other on a daily basis and coordinate our response accordingly."
Mr Khairy reiterated that Malaysia would immediately impose further restrictions, including additional tests for vaccinated travellers from Singapore, who are allowed to enter Malaysia without quarantine.
Mr Khairy had said on Wednesday that travellers who enter Malaysia via the VTL are required to take additional Covid-19 rapid tests on the third and seventh day after their arrival.
The Malaysia-Indonesia Vaccinated Travel Lane (VTL) is expected to open early next year, allowing travellers to finally cross the border to our neighbouring country.
So if you’ve been dreaming of a Balinese holiday, your dream may soon come true. Prime Minister Ismail Sabri Yaakob previously said in the early stages, the VTL lanes between Kuala Lumpur and Jakarta and Kuala Lumpur and Bali could be opened first.
According to The Star, Ambassador of Indonesia to Malaysia Hermono said a team of Indonesian officials visited Malaysia last week to conduct a technical inspection on the proposed VTL. He also said that a number of technical issues need to be addressed because the VTL can officially open.
This includes the interoperability of Malaysia’s MySejahtera and Indonesia’s Peduli Lindungi app, the mutual recognition of vaccines, as well as the standardisation of the RT-PCR COVID-19 test.
If the Malaysia-Indonesia VTL goes ahead, it will be the second country after Singapore to open a travel bubble for Malaysia. Other VTLs are currently being postponed due to the rising threat of the Omicron variant. Malaysia has also banned visitors from a number of high-risk nations such as Malawi, South Africa, Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mozambique, Namibia, and Zimbabwe.


